1. A description of the problem and a discussion of the background. (**15 marks**)

1. Business Understanding- 
Build the ability to predict the severity of an accident which can be utilized for quick traffic control and allowing insurance firms to disperse funds/ help quicker. Balanced and labeled dataset is required for the analysis.
Need categorical and numeric data. Feature Engineering is required.
2. Data Understanding- The data used will be the Data-Collisons.csv (shared on Coursera).  The data contains 37 attributes.  The dependent field is a categorical (ordinal) variable is SEVERITYCODE; independent variables both numerical and categorical variables.
3. Data Preparation and Cleaning- 
Handle missing data
Check and treat outliers
Treat for imbalance in dataset- Random under-sampling, SMOTE over-sampling
Feature Engineering
Conversion of categorical variables to numeric values
4. Modeling-
Multi-label classification/ prediction.  Methods that can be used-
- Naïve Bayes
- Gradient Boosting
- Decision Tree
- Random Forest
5. Evaluation-
Accuracy, precision, recall, F-Square.  Tuning hyper-parameters. 
6. Deployment- Run it on entire dataset, create visualizations to display model results and improve interpretability.
7. Areas of implementation- Government road traffic, Insurance


2. A description of the data and how it will be used to solve the problem. (**15 marks)
Collisions data for Seattle for the time period 2004-2020 will be used to predict the severity of accidents.  The data contains the following columns-**
OBJECTID ObjectID ESRI unique identifier
SHAPE Geometry ESRI geometry field
INCKEY Long A unique key for the incident
COLDETKEY Long Secondary key for the incident
ADDRTYPE Text, 12 Collision address type:
• Alley
• Block
• Intersection
INTKEY Double Key that corresponds to the intersection
associated with a collision
LOCATION Text, 255 Description of the general location of the
collision
EXCEPTRSNCODE Text, 10
EXCEPTRSNDESC Text, 300
SEVERITYCODE Text, 100 A code that corresponds to the severity of the
collision:
• 3—fatality
• 2b—serious injury
• 2—injury
• 1—prop damage
• 0—unknown
SEVERITYDESC Text A detailed description of the severity of the
collision
COLLISIONTYPE Text, 300 Collision type
PERSONCOUNT Double The total number of people involved in the
collision
PEDCOUNT Double The number of pedestrians involved in the
collision. This is entered by the state.
PEDCYLCOUNT Double The number of bicycles involved in the collision.
This is entered by the state.
VEHCOUNT Double The number of vehicles involved in the collision.
This is entered by the state.
INJURIES Double The number of total injuries in the collision. This
is entered by the state.
SERIOUSINJURIES Double The number of serious injuries in the collision.
This is entered by the state.
FATALITIES Double The number of fatalities in the collision. This is
entered by the state.
INCDATE Date The date of the incident.
INCDTTM Text, 30 The date and time of the incident.
JUNCTIONTYPE Text, 300
Category of junction at which collision took
place
SDOT_COLCODE Text, 10 A code given to the collision by SDOT.
SDOT_COLDESC Text, 300 A description of the collision corresponding to
the collision code.
INATTENTIONIND Text, 1
Whether or not collision was due to inattention.
(Y/N)
UNDERINFL Text, 10 Whether or not a driver involved was under the
influence of drugs or alcohol.
WEATHER Text, 300 A description of the weather conditions during
the time of the collision.
ROADCOND Text, 300 The condition of the road during the collision.
LIGHTCOND Text, 300 The light conditions during the collision.
PEDROWNOTGRNT Text, 1 Whether or not the pedestrian right of way was
not granted. (Y/N)
SDOTCOLNUM Text, 10 A number given to the collision by SDOT.
SPEEDING Text, 1 Whether or not speeding was a factor in the
collision. (Y/N)
ST_COLCODE Text, 10 A code provided by the state that describes the
collision. 
ST_COLDESC Text, 300 A description that corresponds to the state’s
coding designation.
SEGLANEKEY Long A key for the lane segment in which the collision
occurred.
CROSSWALKKEY Long A key for the crosswalk at which the collision
occurred.
HITPARKEDCAR Text, 1 Whether or not the col

How will the data be used to solve the problem of predicting the severity of a collision-

Severity of a collision can be determined by 

1. The type of collision that has taken place
2. The speed of the vehicles that are involved in the collision
3. Types of vehicles involved in the collision- Cars, buses, trucks, bicycles
4. Weather condition during the collision- Wet and icy roads (difficult to maneuver the vehicle) or foggy weather (low visibility) tends to be dangerous to drive on
5. Road condition where the collision has taken place- Bad roads can cause severe collisions
6. Light condition on the road where collision has taken place- Poorly lit streets is an issue
7. Condition of the drivers of the vehicles involved in the collision- Was the collision caused due to lack of attention, under influence of drugs or alcohol?
8. The number of people that have been hurt due to the collision- Fatalities, serious injuries, and injuries caused due to the accident
